Security Features of Windows Operating System
Introduction
Microsoft Windows is one of the oldest commercial operating systems in the market today. Windows is the world's most-used operating system for desktop and laptop computers, with a market share of around 76% (Bircan & Tuna 2023). Over the years, there have been OS developments on windows from its first ever version of Windows 1 which was introduced in 1985 (Bircan & Tuna 2023). Among the changes made to different versions of Windows are the computing power, appearance, and security features. This essay aims to discuss Windows 10 security features concerning its file system, assess the recent improvements and the implications of these improvements on software developers. In addition, a brief comparison of in-built security features will be compared between Windows OS and MacOS. 
Windows 10 Security Features
There are several security features of the Windows 10 OS file system:
Secure boot and trusted boot security feature. This feature is helpful while the device is starting, as it prevents corrupted components and malware from loading at this stage. The initial Window's boot-up is protected by a secure boot, while the trusted boot carries on with the secondary booting protection. These two security features ensure that Windows launches safely and securely (Microsoft 2023).
Controlled folder access. The controlled folder security feature limits the access of apps to a specific folder and therefore protects sensitive or selected folders from unauthorized access by potentially harmful apps. Therefore, the controlled folder access security feature allows access to folders by trusted apps only. The user can utilize this feature to configure which apps they consider trusted and which folder to protect from access by untrusted apps. The controlled folder access assists in protecting sensitive data from malicious damage, data breach and ransomware (Microsoft 2023). 
Windows defender firewall. This is one of the most common security features in the Windows operating system. Like any other firewall, Windows defender allows the user to control the network traffic entering the device and the traffic the device can send to the network. Secondly, the Windows defender firewall requires authentication before communication with other devices through a network (Microsoft 2023).
Windows security app. This is an inbuilt security feature that allows the user to review the security and health status of the device. The app provides insights and recommendations that can help identify the issue and take the necessary actions to resolve the problems. The security settings found under the Windows security app are firewall, virus protection and network security, among others(Microsoft 2023).
Anti-tampering protection. This security feature is meant to protect the device during cyber-attacks. Malicious actors attempt to disable security features to access data and install malware on the target device easily. After tampering with the devised security settings, bad actors proceed with attacks knowing there is no chance of being blocked. However, with anti-tampering protection, such activities are prevented, making the attack somewhat hard (Microsoft 2023).
Provision and Support of Security Features of Windows 10
Upon installation of Windows 10, most of the security features are available. Some are activated automatically, such as windows defender firewall, while others, such as controlled folder access, require the user's configuration. However, this security feature is common in Windows 8, 8.1, 10 and 11 (Microsoft 2023). In addition, Windows security features constantly scan the device for harmful security threats and malware. If any is detected, Windows security features eliminate the threat or alert the user to take the necessary actions to resolve the issues. In addition to the real-time protection, Windows 10 and 11 download updates over the internet to keep the device safe from threats (Microsoft 2023). 
Windows allows the user to manually inspect and scan the device for malware and security threats. This happens in cases where the user suspects security threats in specific folders or files. Additionally, even though Windows security features run automatic scans occasionally, the user can set how frequently they would like the scans to occur. This can be done through the "task scheduler" option under the Windows security feature available in Windows 7, 8, 8.1, 10 and 11 (Microsoft 2023).
Windows security utilizes visual features on icons to indicate the devise's safety level. Three colours are used: (i) A green icon indicates that there are no required actions at the moment and that the apps are running in optimal security levels, (ii) A yellow icon indicates that there are some safety recommendations to the user and they should pay attention to the app or the system and, (iii) A red icon is a warning and alert that the user’s immediate action is required (Microsoft 2023). 
Windows allows the user to troubleshoot problems with security features. Troubleshooting means checking for possible solutions to a problem online when the solution cannot be resolved through other measures. Moreover, the user can easily contact the Microsoft support team in cases where they need assistance. Numerous informative materials can be accessed through Microsoft's official websites, and they can be used to inform the user as well as provide answers to their queries (Microsoft 2023). Commonly available materials cover windows 7, 8, 8.1, 10 and 11 as they currently are the commonly used Windows OS versions.
A Comparison of Windows and MacOS Security Features
MacOS, like Windows, has an inbuilt firewall (Mac firewall) that protects the device from unauthorized access and external threats—notably, the firewall security feature works similarly in Mac and Windows operating systems. However, unlike in Windows, where the firewall is turned on automatically upon installation of the OS, the Mac firewall has to be turned on manually (Apple Inc 2023). 
Secondly, similar to the controlled folder access security feature in Windows 10, MacOS has the App sandboxing and gatekeeper security feature. Just like the controlled folder access in Windows, this security feature limits the access of critical folders by unauthorized apps and hence controls what malware can do. However, app sandboxing and gatekeeper feature work in two reliable ways, app sandboxing restricts access to sensitive folders by unauthorized apps, and gatekeeper restricts the user from installing malicious apps (Apple Inc 2023). The gatekeeper feature only allows the installation of trusted apps from the App store or trusted developers (Apple Inc 2023).
MacOS has a startup security feature that launches during the booting process (Apple Inc 2023). Like the secure boot and trusted boot security feature on Windows OS, this feature ensures safe and secure booting by restricting unsigned or corrupted operating systems and protects against malware. However, unlike secure boot and trusted boot security system in Windows, which works in a dedicated manner, secure boot in macOS works as the sole feature securing the system boot process.
Most of the MacOS security features and apps are classified under the MacOS security app. Like the Windows security app, the MacOS security app contains overlapping layers of common security features such as app sandboxing and gatekeeper, Mac firewall, and secure boot security. These features and apps are classified under the MacOS security app because they perform similar tasks, securing the device and the data (Apple Inc 2023).
Implications of Security Features to App Developers
There are several positive and negative implications of OS security features for app developers:
Constant updates require app developers to keep up with the updates. App developers are required to follow up on respective updates on OS security features and make necessary updates on their apps to ensure that they are compatible and meet the security features' requirements (Caprolu et al. 2019). This makes app development expensive and rather demanding.
App developers are required to follow recommended procedures and channels or be verified as trusted developers for their apps to be listed on the Apps store. This is one of the major challenges facing upcoming app developers as their apps might be considered harmful, restricting them from accessing the crucial folder and data they might require to run (Votipka et al. 2020).
For trusted app developers, OS security features are important as they minimize competition while at the same time promoting the work of the app developer. Apps are mostly developed for commercial purposes, and the more downloads, the more the developer is likely to make from their work (Caprolu et al. 2019). By restricting other apps, several developers are likely to benefit from minimum or no competition.
Conclusion
There have been several versions of the OS, with Windows 11 as the version in the market. Windows has several security features, such as anti-tampering protection, the security app, and the windows defender firewall, among others. These security features are aimed at protecting the user, the device and the data from loss, damage or external attack. There are significant similarities and differences between Windows and MacOS security features. Moreover, security features have positive and negative implications for app developers. In future, Windows should consider dedicating its malware protection features such as Windows defender. This would make the app compatible with other third-party apps, such as Chrome browser performing advanced tasks such as ad blocking.
Reference List
Microsoft (2023). Stay protected with Windows Security. [online] support.microsoft.com. Available at: https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/stay-protected-with-windows-security-2ae0363d-0ada-c064-8b56-6a39afb6a963.
Apple Inc (2023). Security features for MacBook Pro. [online] Apple Support. Available at: https://support.apple.com/en-ke/guide/macbook-pro/apdcf567823b/mac [Accessed 22 Feb. 2023].
Bircan, M. and Tuna, G., 2023. Analysis of Windows Operating Systems in Incident Response Processes in Cyber Wars: Use of Open Source Tools. In Handbook of Research on War Policies, Strategies, and Cyber Wars (pp. 1-25). IGI Global.
Mohammad, A.H., 2020. Analysis of ransomware on windows platform. International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, 20(6), pp.21-27.
Caprolu, M., Di Pietro, R., Lombardi, F. and Raponi, S., 2019, July. Edge computing perspectives: architectures, technologies, and open security issues. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing (EDGE) (pp. 116-123). IEEE.
Votipka, D., Fulton, K.R., Parker, J., Hou, M., Mazurek, M.L. and Hicks, M., 2020. Understanding security mistakes developers make: Qualitative analysis from build it, break it, fix it. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20) (pp. 109-126).
